Applicable products are returnable within the applicable return window if you've received them in a condition that is physically damaged, has missing parts or accessories, defective or different from their description on the product detail page on Amazon.in.
If you report an issue with your Smartphone, Tablet, Laptop, Television, Air Conditioner, Refrigerator, Washing Machine, Microwave, we may facilitate scheduling a technician visit to your location and services availability depends on the location pin code. This visit is scheduled by placing an order with Amazon through Amazon.in Home Services. Subject to Amazon.in Home Services Terms and Conditions, a resolution will be provided based on the technician's evaluation report.
We will carry out verification checks and return will be processed only if:
it is determined that the product was not damaged while in your possession;
the product is not different from what was shipped to you;
the product is returned in original condition (with brand’s/manufacturer's box, MRP tag intact, user manual, warranty card and all the accessories therein).
If you wish to return an electronic device that stores any personal information, please ensure that you have removed all such personal information from the device prior to returning. Amazon shall not be liable in any manner for any misuse or usage of such information.
Products may not be eligible for return in some cases as covered in detail in the “Return Policy Types” table below, including cases of buyer's remorse such as incorrect model or color of product ordered or incorrect product ordered.
Products marked as "non-returnable" on the product detail page cannot be returned. However, in an unlikely event of damaged, defective or wrong item delivered to you, we will provide a full refund or replacement, as applicable. We may contact you to ascertain the damage or defect in the product prior to issuing refund/replacement. We reserve the right to pick up the product to ascertain the damage or defect in the product prior to issuing refund/replacement.
No additional information is required to return an eligible order unless otherwise noted in the category specific policy.
Products may be eligible for replacement only if the same seller has the exact same item in stock
On products where return is eligible (basis the policy defined in the Return Policy Types table below), if the seller does not have the exact same product in stock, a refund would be issued to you instead of a Replacement.
Products purchased by international customers are not eligible for returns. However, orders made by international customers are eligible for refunds and customers will have to contact customer service within 5 business days from delivery date or estimated delivery date to claim refunds. For India based customers please refer to the display page to confirm the days of replacement / return specific to the item before purchase.
To know about the Return window for Amazon Business orders, please visit here. here.
In the event customers are found to misuse the return policy by excessively returning, or cancelling or not accepting the orders placed, Amazon reserves the right to warn and/or suspend and/or block and/or terminate such customer accounts, as necessary.

Note: If you've received a non-returnable product in a damaged/defective condition, you can contact us within 5 days from the delivery of the product.
Note: All product categories are non-returnable for International Customers for Export Orders.
